---
title: "Terraform: Where We Can Automate, We Should"
date: 2024-03-15
---

It occurs to me that I might be late to the party on Terraform, but I believe there is still reluctance from companies to incorporate Infrastructure as Code (IAC) as it is destructive and costly in nature. So, I write this blog to demonstrate how quickly you can get up and running. Although I'd consider myself inexperienced when it comes to using Terraform, I believe I have a good handle on some of the fundamentals.

## First Off, Why Terraform or Even IAC?
Okay, so lets get straight into it why do we want to automate our exisiting manual processes?

Automating the process of creating or deleting infrastructure opens it up to more users, as there is a steep learning curve in the creation and provisioning of infrastructure. Automating the more technical side of things lowers the barrier to entry.

This leads into my next point: Management. For anyone who has ever had to interact with the AWS console, you will know it can be quite overwhelming to anyone not familiar with it. Hence, altering existing infrastructure requires a level of confidence, experience, and familiarity. Changing existing infrastructure with Terraform is declarative in nature, meaning that you describe what you want your end product to look like and Terraform handles the underlying logic. The argument could be made that lowering the bar to entry will take away the need to get a deeper understanding of how the infrastructure works and fits together. To that I would argue that infrastructure/network engineers aren't going anywhere, and this is a tool to streamline the processes.

And finally, cost. Terraform provides an exceptional amount of control over managing resources. The goal is to only pay for infrastructure we are actually using, streamlining deleting resources and saving on cloud costs. But creating and deleting infrastructure, as I’ve said, is cumbersome, and this provides a nice tool to fully provision and create the infrastructure you need.

# Let's Run Through an Example
## Prerequisites

Terraform is instantiated in your code editor of choice. If you're not sure how to install Terraform, see [here](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli).
An AWS account

## Scenario
Let's say you have no infrastructure up and running and you want to spin up a single EC2 instance in a Virtual Private Network.

### Step 1
Create a file called main.tf in your directory. We will work from the top down and start with a Virtual Private Network. Think of this as a distinct space for us to add other infrastructure.

In main.tf
```terraform
provider "aws" {
  region = "eu-west-1"
}

resource "aws_vpc" "test-main" {
  cidr_block       = "10.0.0.0/16"
  instance_tenancy = "default"
  
  tags = {
    Name = "test-main"
  }
}
```
### Step 2
Lets create a subnet inside of our VPC.

```terraform

Lets create a subnet inside of our VPC.

resource "aws_subnet" "subnet_A" {
  cidr_block = "172.20.1.0/24"
  vpc_id     = aws_vpc.test-main.id
  tags = {
    Name = "Subnet A"
  }
}
```

### Step 3
Lets create our Ec2 instanc on AWS

```terraform
resource "aws_instance" "ec2-main" {
  ami                         = "<your-AMI>"
  instance_type               = "c4.2xlarge"
  subnet_id                   = aws_subnet.subnet_A.id
  key_name                    = "Test-key"
  vpc_security_group_ids      = [aws_security_group.allow_ssh.id]
  associate_public_ip_address = true
  tags = {
    Name                = "ec2-main"
  }
}
```

This will create the basics but you will also need to look into adding security rules to allow for SSH access, an internet gateway and even storage. I have some examples of these here [Playwright Example Repository](https://github.com/Joshua850/playwright-example.git)
